It's P.J. quick know before we start the show a lot of people are hearing reply all for the first time this
week and we wanted to direct you to some episodes that you might like in addition
to this one.
So episode twenty nine to take over that is one of our favorites. It is about the
most teenage teenager that I've ever met my life and the fake company start on the
Internet episode forty two blind spot has through the essentially by sheer force of
will turn yourself into a real life
house and investigating a medical mystery and then Episode forty seven quit already.
That is about a grandmother who made a Facebook post that actually helped topple a government.
So check out those episodes check out the rest the archives and enjoy this week's
episode
from gimlet this is reply all. I'm Alex Goldmark and I'm T.J..
And we are back. Back in the New Year. Yeah twenty sixty. Welcome to the New Year everybody.
Do you have a
resolution.
I
don't have a resolution should I do is there something you'd like me to do now is just asking for
your your relationship with yourself. My relationship to myself is so thoroughly broken. I've given
up
introspection three cause you are my resolution. Sure to does a scene if you're of no more
seething resentments. Wow Got no fight with somebody in a
restaurant they were yelling curse
words and I was having dinner with like my dad or my sisters they were yelling curse words and normally would
have seeds in resentment say whatever and said hey this is a small restaurant
yelling curse words and that could you please stop and when they
did they said OK and then they muttered a bunch of things about me like on here.
Did you resent see the resentment subside. Yeah. Ha. Interesting.
OK So we are not here to talk about her new year's resolutions that we
have we're here because through the Panama. He has a story for us.
Yes I do your job you tell people is about.
Yes please start it.
So this is a story about a family and this huge thing happened to the family and it puts them into
a situation where they have no control a They've got options but they're not real
options and the way they decide to deal with it is to invite the entire
world into this very personal problem they have and when you
first told me about it it sounded like unfathomable to me like you did not it didn't make
sense so you went to find out what was going on.
Yes. So let me start by introducing you to
the
couple a new green cars and Ryan Green. Oh yes
I know I really need those I think that's
why I'm suffering this morning because
I live
in a small house in Loveland Colorado chatting online got
married turned twenty one they moved into this house the very next
day they had their first son Caleb their second son
Isaac was a computer programmer and Amy took care of the
kids they were just living in a mess of diapers and toys church every
Sunday and then in two thousand and nine they had
Joel
was
born the other
day if I was twenty five when he was four and then Isaac was four and I would've been like
twenty seven yeah I think I was twenty eight I was twenty one July figured
out things were going fine and then right around Joel's first birthday.
He started to throw up a lot and Amy and Ryan noticed he was tilting his head
to one side the doctor did a bunch of tests and found a tumor in his brain
a particularly rare and aggressive kind called
and so when you have an eighty or
eighty. You'll go
through all the most intense chemotherapy and all the most intense radiation they throw
the kitchen sink at it and doing that you have about a fifty percent chance of
surviving for five years.
I double checked this and it turns out the odds of survival are even grimmer it's
a fifty percent chance of surviving just two
years when you hear this kind of news. Is there any part of you that's like what if
you don't do the
treatment sure I remember before his
first surgery asking them a lot about like really have to have she was therapy and to you know myself because I can't
do that like maybe it would be better for him to just die now because I don't think
that I can like put my kids through
chemotherapy for years but then as time wore on and by the time we actually even heard about the
the tumor. Then you're just thinking like oh well fifty percent like that's half
like we've got a good shot that he gets through
this with what do you think
I have to say he's excusing the awful so they're taking care
of him. This
is from a home video. Joel's brothers meeting him in the hospital. Isaac
is two and a half looking kind of scared.
Joel is a little over a year old he's lying in a small red wagon hooked up to
an I.V. one of his eyes is turned and just a little Doctors may have nicked a nerve. When
they removed his tumor too skinny and his head is perfectly round his
food his food goes to that too
yeah Joe went through ten months of intense treatment.
Amy and Ryan spent six seven eight hours a day holding Joel in a hospital
bed while he got
chemo and then his parents spent nights feeding him through an
I.V. And so it be like
this our pump and he would be this like this a white milky
substance that would provide all of his nutrition because he couldn't swallow very
well even the sweet moments were sometimes hard to enjoy.
One day it was a nice shaft. She was holding
Joel by with sitting in his room with him and I've seen him a
song and clapping and he was clapping his hands and he was
sort of like babble singing along and so like for me it was just one of those moments that you felt
like I'm always going to remember this like sometimes you just have a moment and you go I'm going to remember this the rest of my
life and then that made me sad because I thought oh like that the reason I think I'll
remember those the rest of my life is because he could
die until eventually I did just kind of decide like
I think I need to be all in like I think I need to love him like mad and I think we need to live our
lives like he's going to live.
That's what they did for a year and then in November two thousand and ten just
before Joel second birthday.
The doctors called the men and said we're really sorry Joe has a new tumor
and there's nothing we can do now to cure him best we can do is radiate the tumor ease his
pain and this should have been the end of the story but it
wasn't there was this one night that Ryan says was the worst night
and all of Joel's on this Joe had a stomach bug. He was throwing up got the hydrated.
So Ryan spent the night with him in the
hospital and just remember him really wanting apple
juice as one of his favorite things at the hospital but then I'd give it to me just throw it up
again I wanted to give him just because that's what he wanted but. I knew if I gave it to
him then it would be you know it hurt
him and he's crying and crying and his cries just get more frantic
and animal and there's nothing that Ryan can
do like the into the night. You know just such sunken eyes but I just remember like I
wanted to hold him and I couldn't put him down because he would get so
upset and when Brian finally did put him down. Joel would start hitting his
head against the wall of his crib Eventually Brian himself started to lose it. He was
crying too. And then in the early hours of the morning he lay down and
prayed and I remember that's when he stopped crying and he fell
asleep.
And it was just one of those.
This moves few moments in life where like it felt like an answer from God.
And it wasn't like I heard a voice or saw you know a burning
glass or anything like that but it was just it felt so much like
Mercy and beyond just sheer relief. Ryan had this
other thought frankly a weird thought.
This whole ordeal reminded him of a video game like you have to get
the baby to stop crying so you keep trying things give him juice bounce him talk to him but the
weird thing is in this awful game. None of those things actually work.
They're all like fake choices.
Ryan thought
what if I could make a game like this where you the player you don't really
have control.
Can
I bring you to that place the place that I'm in right
now I want to show you what it feels like to feel helpless
but to have received praise. I felt like it would be
ultimately kerching to
people
I remember she really was like I want to make a game about that day that she was dehydrated in the hospital
thinks that's terrible. That's not a game and no I don't want to play that like to think that that word
game like something you do in your leisure time you know and so who wants to
spend their leisure
time reliving the worst moment of a man's life so I said Do not make that that
is
horrible but he clung to that idea so finally Amy said OK I'll give you
three
months he teamed up with two other people an indie game designer a sound designer he raided
his savings and together they built a prototype.
So a few months later. It's the Game Developers Conference in San Francisco.
Alongside Assassin's Creed
thirty battlefield for the new. Thrift V.R. headset.
There was
Ryan My name is
Ryan about a personal game that I'm making my same Joe had
just one year old brain.
Ryan is standing in front of a bunch of young tech dude. They're listening kind
of
halfheartedly you'll lose a lot of in-fighting has a neighbor or doctors fight for him
or family fights or to serve a God that's the God of the living.
Amy stayed home fretting because they were almost out of money and she was worried
that Ryan would come home feeling
crushed but that's not what happened. Ryan got back
and
said it was amazing this person introduced me to
that person when there's two or three different people who want to fund
my game.
It really blew my mind because I'm still dislike because of Georgie hydration game that I told you
to never make and he realizes like you've never played it like you've never played the scene.
So
Amy puts on the headphones. And finds herself back in
the hospital
room. You're playing Brian.
He looks like he's made out of our economy. You don't see Joe you see an empty crib
and you can hear him crying. You can move your mouse around the screen and
options appear you can walk around the room give him
juice bounce him
but no matter what you do his crying just gets worse
and worse. I hold you.
After
five
or six minutes with us Brian sits in a chair and drops his head into a flask
and
prays. As a player you can't
control when it starts the prayer just happy. After a
while
and
I
was
like.
OK
this
cancer.
Coming
up after the break might be the world's biggest design
problem
space
is
the
easiest way to create a beautiful website blog or
online templates and twenty four seventh's
support is where I post all my
gripes or at least I would if I didn't find it so difficult
to kind of puts me in a really dark hair
and
a lot of what's joyful about my grabbing you notice
the
world runs around the world like everything's so beautiful I want
to write a poem about it and you run around the world
and sometimes I
feel like my grades are genuinely like a caged animal who has no power in the. Just
as to be yelling which animals that I know a
gopher go for cripes icons
logical and so on P.J. suggestion I made the website go for grapes dot com
slash Goldman if you go there you can submit your own rights. And if your grades are really good not only will we add
them to the website but we will read them in an upcoming series
that go there now and start your free trial say today. At Square Space dot com
Make sure to use the offer code replied to get ten percent off your first purchase and show your support for reply
on this week's episode of reply all is brought to you by C. So C. so is
a premium comedy streaming service. It's like a curated Comedy Channel. They have classics like
money Python and kids in the hall and they have. Original series featuring very funny people and there's
new stuff added every week.
P.J. is a serious comedy kind of sort and serious comedy contest
or have it I like to laugh. My co-host P.J. Well he loves to
laugh.
My co-host P.J. vote loves comedy talks about it all the time so
he decided to choose something that he really likes they have a new web series by the people who started the pages
and Brigade Theater which is like the theater where every comedian that you've ever heard of and loved. If you're
me came out of the
three point to hand Amy Poehler Alec Amber all of them. So I'm really say
they see all that stuff. You can watch shows they're right now totally free and ad free. There's
no credit card required to try to
say if you want to access the full site three ninety nine a month download Piso and get
twenty four seventh's streaming of classic shows and never before seen originals totally ad free. Not
that there's anything wrong with having ads in things that S E E E S O dot com and you
can start watching all the comedy. You can stream.
Welcome
back to the show before the break. Ryan and Amy decided to develop a video
game about their son's battle with cancer and they named it that dragon cancer.
The title is a little misleading. This is not a game where you go out and slay dragons.
Instead it's a series of immersive
vignettes the first scene is at the pond you start off as a
duck you paddle towards a little boy it's Joel or
this origami version of him he doesn't have eyes or a mouth but he has a voice.
And that is actually Joel's laugh as you hand them pieces of bread and he throws
them into the water.
You know you throw. Aside
life. The kid speaking here is I sick. Jill's
brother but he can't
talk to you
to
talk like you know you can
all. Still got sick right after he turns one
you have a part of the album that
you explore the most
kids. And there's other vignettes like there's one time. In a
hospital when to keep Joe entertained. Ryan blew up surgical gloves like
balloons. It's this gorgeous scene where you see Joel floating into the nighttime
sky towards the moon holding on to these surgical
balloons and then you see
these blackbirds appear from the corner. That's the cancer and it
pops the balloons one by
one or there's another scene where you're
in the hospital. You're sitting with Joel in a little red wagon and the two of you are riding down the
hall was all there glowing in blue green yellow.
And the goal is to collect all the chemo chemicals they look like little jabs and you move
the controller to grab
them. And throughout the scenes
you play many games you discover rooms listen to voice mails from
Amy there's even little levels. Beat but the
cancer is always around the edges of this world thorny and
black and creeping in no matter how well you do you will
always follow the course of Joel's
illness and at one point you'll
arrive here.
The waiting room where doctors tell him Ian Ryan the joy of cancer is
terminal as they break the news rain starts pouring into the
room and Ryan slowly starts to slip under the
water
usual suspects but already on the Talk Back on how we
can talk about how to train
and
play
with life.
This is a moment where words like play and game are a
pretty
tough fit. It's certainly not
fine but for Ryan and Amy these
heavy scenes are worth
it because they contain these other moments that they've been lucky to experience
with their boys like there's a scene where you blow bubbles for Jol and he keeps
asking for more and more.
And
there was kind of for me this beautiful picture of what it was like to have a child that was sick because he would
think to yourself oh how would you in he think I could just to be able to play with him and
hear him laugh. I would blow him bubbles
for days.
So
they worked on the game for months. Joel who everyone said would die after four months he
was alive and well the palliative radiation killed his tumor and. The next one
on the next. Amy started calling it the cancer that cried
wolf Jol hit all these
milestones that Ryan and Amy have taught themselves not to expect he turned to one
house and said his first word he learned to
swallow and eat normal
food. He turned three and took his first
steps
he just became this miracle baby fifty Amy
says that somebody in their church said they had a vision and a vision that Joel
would do great things.
So anyway. Things are going well two filmmakers called and asked if they could
follow riden Amy
around make a documentary about making this
game. So there's all this video footage around the
game's creation.
So here's Ryan at this computer on a design edit he's talking to
Josh his partner on the game.
We're just go.
Yes Josh starts playing peek a boo with
Joel again and.
So you've got Ryan designing a game about Joel who's sitting on his lap the whole
time you've got his wife who's helping write scenes in the game and she's acting in
it and now they also have six other people on the team developers three D. artists a sound designer.
I've sat in on some of their design meetings they all happen on Google Hangouts you know like my
character always shouts.
And I feel like maybe a little bit better you're going to this
because I feel like it because Brian always direct my
audio and so you know Ellie. You're just all like
well I'm
like. I'm blaming
the directing your bad
director for three years the routine was the
same get a tear it would go away. Joe would get a
to go way this happened fifteen times. And
then this routine breaks the doctors tell them to
Murs that they cannot
treat us that the tumors that were there.
One was in a field we had already radiated and you cannot continue to radiate an area too much or it
can cause brain death and it was right brain
stem received the most radiation
before for the first time was not an
option but Amy and Ryan knew
that this couldn't be
and this is the cancer the crisis will be found in experimental drug
trial in San Francisco and they decided to go. They packed up their whole
family four boys including Joel and drove the twelve hundred miles. They lived
in San Francisco for two whole
months and the treatment. It didn't work.
Stop
swallowing he stopped walking and eventually he needed an oxygen tank to keep breathing.
So in March they drove back home to
Loveland the first night we drove around the car like he was
it wasn't doing well enough of going in the
car after an hour of driving around. We tried to get chill out. And he kept
saying go because a family will tell you to go as you please and he chick is headed please go
go hard as he didn't wanna get out of the car. So you were like well maybe we should just drive
you around for the next few days.
A
few days later. Amy and Ryan invite everyone they know to their home.
We had a prayer night just praying for him to be healed everyone
over here we spent hours just worshiping and
prayed. There's video footage of this night. Living room.
There's family members friends people from their church community wryness holding Joel and
they're
praying all we have is the hero was always.
The only hope we have is your service.
So why would hope all I have that might disappoint me.
But
I hope.
The.
What's
your strongest
memory. I think is just realizing that he's gone.
And I don't know it's the it's
that space of being with a bunch of people that desperately want the same
thing that you are crying out
for that grace and mercy trying to fit invade a situation.
Joe died later that night it was March thirteenth two thousand and
fourteen. And even though he'd been terminal for more than three years.
Amy said that at that moment she was completely unprepared.
I feel like in a way because we were believing that he would be healed and because we were believing that even if he
died maybe should be raised from the dead like which is mild You said that your story because it's
weird and I so get that it's weird of
us because we still believe that he could live.
I feel like we didn't go through all the processes of getting ready for him to die
the way that maybe you would if you were certain that this was it.
And so the next several weeks are just terrible she. You
know what they did this
for she's just trying to pick up the pieces they have to organize a memorial
service
funeral and then at some point people are sending her these grief
books people send you a bunch of grief books after your child dies and like you look at them but you also
kind of just don't like because you don't care of your grief is like anyone else's and you don't care what you're supposed to
be feeling but I kind of was like something through them and one thing I read talked about that grief
is all of the feelings you have and morning is what you create out of those
feelings or what you do with
them
and so she realizes that the game is. Now it's
become their
morning we had money set aside like
a grave marker to stone. I finally thought you know
like the gravestone supposed to be the memorial for him to like you're making his memorial So like
let's take this money we've set aside for this and use it to
build the game and win the game instead we could always go
back and do the gravestone but just like I love that we're doing this like
I
love that we're putting everything we have in to this game and it feels
like children's service like it deserves to have everything from us all
of our emotion all of our investment. All of our money like I'm sort
of glad that it cost us
everything
and this brings us to the
cathedral Rhein decides that the only way to capture those
final months of Joel's life and his death is by setting it all in a
cathedral and not just any cathedral. This will be the place that contains all of their
feelings about losing
Joel and for the player. It would be the climax of the game.
So when you walk into the cathedral in this narrow
hallway with faulty ceilings all the stone is white
inside it almost looks like
it was carved from a single piece of rock the whole way. They go in and now the
ceiling soars up above
you the cathedral is full of light and you're heading towards the light as you move
though you realize that you're walking very slowly because the cathedral is so
large and you immediately have this feeling of being in a holy place
but Ryan also wanted to represent the human body. Joel's body. So
the pillars twist and turn like
rips a curve as they rise up into the ceiling and look up into the ceiling
you see that there is carvings of
of flora and these stone flowers that are in bedded in the
ceiling almost like a garden. I wanted the cathedral to feel alive or
full of life but also frozen.
But here's the thing to Ryan. This doesn't totally describe those last months
with
Joel when you fight cancer. You're burning cells. You
are poisoning the body your doing all these things to kill something
you do all this damage in our quest to like seek life.
The cathedral has to show that damage. So Ryan removed all of that heavenly light and
he snake these neon tubes along the floor the
tube started and so this idea of all the different things that we had hooked up to all throughout his
whole illness. Whether it be any tradition or humor
therapy or
antibiotics and he just kept going until the player is bathed in yon
light in a sense turned into this neon
I club. I mean there's this there's this sense. I have
the neon crosses and there's the cross up on the altar is
like wrapped in a vine of the year and there's there's neon
vines like crawling the pillars to the left and to the right.
He's trying to say like these are the unnatural things that we do you in order to stay
alive.
But the Cross says Amy didn't like them. This fall. So Ryan removed
them and then he had the
thought we have all these cubes and things for chemo but I want to put
in the machines that were
keeping Joe alive and so he starts building
equipment very loud almost steampunk type
contraptions that you would press a button to keep him
going the user would have to like fiddle with the levers
and make things just right so that that Scholz getting what he needs to stay
alive and we kind of leaned into that. Even more because
there's the scaffolding and there's this huge stained glass. Depiction of showing
us that wasn't done
yet and so you would climb the scaffolding and you put in a piece of
glass but then you would look down and you see the indicator for his
oxygen and he was running low so you'd run back down the scaffolding and you want to
like change the dials or
press the button that and then run back up the stuffing.
But then after months of building these machines.
He gets rid of them.
Why do you decide to take out the machines done. Like why does that whole section go.
So I think I want people to feel like you could kill
jaw like that it was their fault that he
died and they think you know what this is
all this is all a little more of
it and so on the right side of the cathedral I replaced the oxygen
tank with this huge installation of an
amusement
park an amusement park inside the cathedral. Because during those last two
months in San Francisco the family had loved going to Disneyland. So for
starters I had this shooting
gallery can actually shoot the target.
Yeah you can shoot a target like you can pick up. You can pick up these little rifles
tethered to the
stand and you aim at these
chickens. She's the animals and they turn into fried
chicken but after months and months of work. Brian decides this
amusement park is distracting from the bigger idea of this final weeks which is asking
God for mercy. So he scrapped the entire park.
Brian
has
been stuck inside this cathedral. He spent a year on it drawing and redrawing
the final weeks of his son's life. Hundreds of drafts in the
most recent version. There are these prayer
candles
and every time you light one you hear a prayer from the night of Joel's death.
I've
spoken to Ryan several times during this whole process. Sometimes he
sounds defeated but other times happy and upbeat and whenever he
thinks
he finally has it. He shows it to Amy who looks at it and
says I don't think that's right and it's been hard I think for both of us to get to a place
where
we say. It can say all the things the kids' future all can say all the things we
want to say I just had to cut something else in the game because we can finish it and it's hard
to be just one and never finish it and make it as beautiful as
possible and I don't know like there's a part of me feels like we betrayed the project by
finishing it.
But of course they have to finish it. There's investors. There's a release
date and the thing as the longer Ryan works on this cathedral. The
further away it's all
gaps. What's disappointing to me is how quickly it
fades jolts the memories
and person of Joel fades because
he becomes more and more an idea.
This game is not him. It's just an echo of him it's not funny even the best.
Echo of him.
I think that's the thing I'm struggling with as we as we're approaching the end of
this the good I do all this for why why is
it that
the game is coming out mid
January the cathedral is magnificent but to Ryan it will always
be
unfinished
sure.
Ryan
was able to finish the place that comes right after the cathedral. It's the scene where
you say goodbye to
chill you find yourself in a boat next to Joel. There's no
or. You're headed towards an
island you get there. You walk along a small
path and you end up in a clearing in the woods.
There's a picnic
blanket sitting on
it
and around him are all the things he loved
about
a huge stack of pancakes way way bigger than him a little
dog
and
bubble
gum
ball for as long as
you're
OK.
And
you
just
keep
blowing
bubbles
and at some point you just walk away if I
can
talk
to
my
reply or producer should have been a mini that dragon cancer comes
out January
twelfth.
Reply always P.J. vote and me Alex Goldman we are produced this week by Tim Howard treated
Bimini and FIA bene's our editor is Peter
Clowney production assistant Spike Lee will hold we were mixed
by Rick was Matt lever is the quiet stillness of the years for snowfall.
Special thanks to filmmakers David I said in the league as you Holly world who allowed us to use footage from
their documentary thank you for playing which is about the creation of that dragon cancer. You
can learn more about
the film and where you can see it thank you for playing dot com. Special thanks also
to Jad Abumrad Soren wheeler. Jamie York ighly show Neal.
John Hillman and Josh Larson our theme song is by the mysterious brake master cylinder and our ad
music is by Bill buildings.
You can find us at our
website reply all that ninja or an i Tunes at itunes dot com. Reply all.
Well sure he was reporting the story we found out that Wired magazine was doing a big article
on that drug and cancer. There's beautiful photos and video at Wired dot com slash
that dragon cancer.
Thanks to our sponsors see so good to see so dot com to stream original comedy series like the U.C.B. show.
That's the Upright Citizens Brigade
show C S O S three ninety nine per month and it's ad free and you can even try the site
for free. That's C. So dot com S E S O dot com.
And Squarespace build it beautiful use the Africa reply to sign up for square space at
square space dot com and get ten percent off your first
purchase.